Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the,
the Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Labs. And today
I'm joined by Doctor Katie Rose Hitman. She's professor
in the Department of Anthropology and the Children and
Youth Studies Program at Brooklyn College kni and she's
coed toor of a book. We're going to talk
about today, gender and power in strength sports. Strong
as feminists. So Katie, welcome to the show. It's
a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you, Ricardo. I'm very excited to be here.
So tell us first, what is the premise of
this book? Exactly.
So the book is um in a sort of
an investigation of strength sports, which is a particular
kind of sport uh based on uh power and
brute force. So strength, the the premise of the
book is to move weight. Um And to, because
I kind of investigate that from a feminist perspective,
a couple of friends and I got together to,
we were all some sort of strength athlete and
we decided to, we only see a certain kind
of people. There's all these interesting things happening in
our gyms. And so we decided to see if
there was an interest to put something together um
on the concept of strength sports from an interdisciplinary
but really a kind of pointed feminist perspective.
We're going to get into that interdisciplinary bit about
the book in a second. But in what ways
would you say, generally speaking that sports would intersect
with politics since we're going to get into that
in and feminism specifically?
Yeah. Excellent question. Um So for me, I'm a
cultural anthropologist by training. Um AND my main focus
in my strength sports research is crossfit. Um And
as someone who kind of studies, culture and societies,
there's, I would say that there's really nothing about
sports that isn't political. So you can actually any
question you would say like, how is like, you
know that, yeah, just a, a political part of
the, of the activity, the human activity. But a
really general question that uh or a general example
that can be used to understand that is we're
having the Olympics coming up uh the Summer Olympics
2024 in Paris. And that is a geopolitical event,
right? So athletes have to represent a country, you're
not representing yourself sure your name is, but when
you win, you are and you compete, you display
your Nation State in your uniform and then your
flag and your national anthem is presented and, and
played if you win. Um And then tallies yours,
all the, the different medals are tallied according to
nation state. Um And then there are some nation
states that aren't invited because they, the country has
been uh has not participated by what's called the
Olympic truce, which is linked to uh to war.
And so Russian and Belarusian uh athletes don't get
to compete under the Russian flag or nation state.
So even just something like as simple as like
the, the Olympics, all of that is geopolitical and
then there's economic issues that are always involved. Um
There's transnational, we look at, you know, the legacy
of like, what are the most popular sports in
the world. They often have the legacy of colonialism,
like football or cricket. And so there's really interesting,
you know, we can talk about all kinds of
things of sport and there's probably some element of
it that has some of a political uh component.
So we would say um as a cultural anthropologist,
like lots of things you can kind of think
about all aspects of sport and probably kind of
come up with something that um even if it
doesn't feel like it in the moment, you can
sort of analyze it from a political perspective and
by political, we mean kind of power. So it's
not just about like a nation state or a
state, but you know, the way power works too.
So even, you know, other like non uh Olympic
events, like local events are kind of based on
municipalities or states or districts and countries. And so
you're kind of pitting people based on their geopolitical,
uh, location even on, you know, local fandom. So
it's really a kind of an interesting element about
something is like, as like fun and, and a
leisure is like sports or, uh, or even fitness.
So,
would you, would you include something like what happened?
Uh, I, in the 2022 World Cup, the soccer
or football, world Cup, depending on where you come
from. Uh, WHEN, uh, we knew that or we
learn that uh uh in Qatar, uh slaves were
used to construct uh or to build the stadiums
there. I mean, would that also be included that
the rubric of the intersection between sports and politics
also because not only that happened, but there are
also people, for example, from the, from Norway, Ling
Holland uh declared a condemned that and then uh
Norway as a team was banned from competing in
the World Cup. So I, I would imagine that
would be another example of that,
right? Yeah, that's an excellent example. And you will
see that there's moments that every kind of, there's
all that kind of underbelly of sport all the
time, right? Um Different kinds of ways in which
uh oppressed peoples are kind of exploited for sports.
Uh THE slave labor to build the stadiums in
Qatar is an excellent example. And then sports are
always used as a political realm to protest. Um
The, the teams that, that wore ban like arm
bands or said something or got kicked out or
got uh they got penalized, right? Or even uh
one of our famous examples in the United States
is the um the gold medalists in track and
field who um uh held up a fist during
the civil rights movement in the United States because
they didn't want to, they were, had a complicated
relationship with the, with the flag. So, absolutely, there's
always the Qatar in example, is a, is a
great example of one and just the fact that
like Qatar, the whole, the whole politics of like
how Qatar got the the the uh World Cup
in the first place, right? There was a question
of bribery and, and like cultivating these relationships with
the voting members of FIFA. So all of that
is, is like the political element of it.
Mhm And also you mentioned the Olympic Games earlier
and I heard that in France, they are planning
on basically removing the homeless people from view because
I mean, you know, it gives always a bad
image or a bad rap about the country. If
people go there, all the eyes around the globe
are uh looking at that particular place and then
there's homeless people on the street, of course, removing
homeless people from the street. Uh I mean, I'm
not sure politically uh and practically what that translates
into exactly, but I wouldn't imagine that it would
be in uh it, it would translate into positive
things for the homeless.
Right. Absolutely. That's an excellent example. Right. Where it's
not just the country coming to compete, but this
image that France has to display as their, you
know, their own motto of Liberty and Fraternity that
they are. Right. They don't have homeless, we don't
see them. Right. And they're probably just moved for
the time, not necessarily placed in, in stable housing.
Yeah, that, that was, I, what I was alluding
to when I said that it probably doesn't relate
into positive outcomes for the homeless people themselves. So
uh tell us then about the interdisciplinary sort of
framework that you and your co-author bring into the
book in what ways is it interdisciplinary?
So there are 13 of us who participated in
this book. So it's an edited volume um which
means, you know, we kind of got participation from
different kinds of people. And then the three of
us, I did it as well as uh Melissa
Forbis who is also a cultural anthropologist at Brooklyn
College. And uh Noel Brigden who's a political scientist
at uh Marquette University, but we wanted to have
different voices. So we have cultural anthropology perspectives. We
have political science, we have human biology, we have
r uh rhetoric, we have media studies, people, we
have gender and sexuality studies, uh folks and we
have journalists, we have a person who is um
less in a scholar and more of a, a
gym owner in El Salvador who has an interest,
you know, like a very different background than some
of us, you know, academic types. And so we
have his a historian as well. So we sort
of tried to bring all different kinds of not
only ways of thinking about the body, from human
biology to his history to political science, but then
also like different elements of like evidence. So some
of us use participant observation, like I participate in
crossfit. I put my body on the line. I
did the workouts where other people looked at images
from competitions or Instagram and social media or historical
documents um in the in the past or official
policies from like the International Powerlifting Federation. So there's
all different kinds of um of evidence that is
also used that helps the interdisciplinary nature of um
of our project. Um All of those different kinds
of divergent tracks are, are sort of we all
the, the, the the thing that kind of com
um you know, keeps us cohesive is this interesting?
We want to focus on the a feminist perspective
and the feminist perspective is not necessarily about women,
not just actually we're all women who are part
uh participated in this even though we tried really
hard to get more men involved. Um It's there
we can talk about kind of the reasons why
they didn't participate, which is political in itself. Um
But we also, we wanted to look at the
hierarchy of gender and how power works in gender
identity. And that's what feminism means. It doesn't mean
women's sports, it means looking at sports and the
way gender is used or mobilized, gendered bodies, gender
hierarchies, gender representations are sort of used strategically manipulatively
um uh to kind of convey or perform or
elicit certain kinds of gendered experience. Um So that's
where the the the overarching cohesiveness is is that
we all looked at something gender related
And when it comes to the feminist side of
it here, you also include a trans women, right?
Because I mean, I'm asking you that because as
you are aware, uh there's at least one branch
of feminist, of feminism out there that tends to
be sort of exclusionary toward uh trans women or
at least looks at them in a negative light,
let's say,
yeah, no. So our sort of uh we're trying
to take a decolonial or intersectional feminist approach, which
is based on um black women, uh literature and
black women scholars sort of created that and we
sort of our, we're, we're not like, we don't,
are not just interested in like the binary of
man and woman, but like the whole continuum of
not only human experience but also the ways in
which people think about gender. Um So the experience
of transgender women and men um is part of
our story, but it also is like how transgender
identity is weaponized in strength sports and why strength
sports in particular is it such a big deal?
Um So we are, we are interested in gender
and sexuality in, you know, but gender like up
in all different kind of complicated ways. So my,
my paper in the, in the book is about
um the masculinity of crossfit. And so it's not
just about men and women's bodies, but the way
in which crossfit kind of like kind of cultivates
a kind of violent, intense, really aggressive, militaristic tone,
which is interpreted as a masculine approach for both
men and women.
One very interesting thing is that you divide the
book into three main parts and you label them
the public body, the disciplined, the disciplined body and
the social body. So why do you establish these
three different dimensions of the body? And what are
you trying to capture with them?
So the book, we put a call out, which
is kind of just a academic term of like
asking if anybody wants to participate, we use list
serves and our own uh networks. And so we
didn't know what kind of other research we were
gonna get. Um And so part of what is,
is sort of analytically trying to think about the
different kinds of papers and arguments that are being
made in each of these chapters. And we found
that they actually kind of, they were different enough
that we needed to sort of, you know, aggregate
them into little groupings. And so the first uh
the first uh section, uh The public body is
about the way women, the way bodies are represented
and gendered in like representation in representational, like either
images or documents. And so in the three chapters
in that section are one about crossfit and femininity
um for women who are in the elite uh
cross competition called the Games. And the way in
which even if they're performing, sort of it is
better than the men. Um THE commentators and the
imagery of the crossfit games still really focuses on
feminizing them. So they wear pearl earrings, they have
their hair done, right? They have makeup on, they're
like trying to be as feminine as possible, even
though their bodies maybe are very muscular, they may
be very strong and they may be actually beating
the men in head on head competitions, which even
the commentators can't imagine that ever happening. It's not
a good thing even that it, you know, for
them, for the commentators. And so the the um
the researchers analyzed how that's the case, like how
women both kind of uh resist these markers of
femininity, but then also use them so that they
are considered women still. Uh THERE'S also a um
uh an examination of the fit of fit motherhood
of like strength athletes who are performing motherhood while
they are pregnant. And this is using social media
imagery and social media comments from people about that
about a uh you know, a pregnant woman, strength
training or competing or a recently postpartum uh woman
competing in a strength sport. And then the final
chapter in that section is on the transgender policies.
So it's actually analyzing the, the way the policy
is framed. So the discourse of the policy and
then we in each, in each section, we have
what's called an interlude, which is just a personal
story from one of scholars or participants who sort
of tells their own. It's like less researchy and
more just a personal anecdote of what it means
to be a woman in the space in these
gym spaces, doing new strength sports. Um AND how
it kind of changes their own experience of themselves
and of their world. So that we, there's an
interlude in that chapter, the bo the discipline body
is really about the way this sort of gender
and power gets kind of into our bodies, into
our muscles, into ourselves, the way we understand the
way we understand our fitness. Um And so in
that there's two chapters, one on the history of
German Turners in the United States. And then mine,
which is on crossfit hero workouts and the way
in which those are used to build a community
predicated on death, which is called a necros sociality.
And then finally, our last section, we had chapters
that were really interested in kind of pushing back,
doing a little bit more than just research or
analysis and kind of thinking about what ways can
string sports find, you know, be AAA method of
solidarity building or resistance or collective action. Um And
in those, we have AAA co edited vol uh
chapter by Araceli and Noel, which is about a
Jim and El Salvador and they co-author that piece
together. Um AND thinking about the difference in their
own positions um as authors, then there's a chapter
on the way in which crossfit can be a
method of healing for women who have experienced some
sort of in intimate partner violence. And, um, you
know, what, what that looks like and how that
actually can be used to do as a healing
intervention. And then I co-authored a piece with my
colleague, Kara Aach, we did a survey during the
pandemic to look at how fitness and stay at
home orders, uh how people were using those or
not using those their fitness regimens to have some
sort of health practice or think about their own
health and well being during the stay at home
orders during the, during COVID. And we found that
women knew how to work out and, and strength
train in partnership in groups and they mobilized those
networks and they actually were much more resilient um,
and had better outcomes than, than men because they
knew how to collectively um uh train together. So
that was kind of the, the over a different
three different parts of this sort of book.
Mhm. So, since we're talking about strength sports here,
I guess that uh very important question and that
you also explore in the book is what strength
means because of course, when we uh commonly think
about it, uh we associate with it with just
the physical component of it. I mean, how much
you can lift? Uh HOW hard can you punch
stuff like that? But you argue in the book
that uh the concept of strength uh also from
a political perspective goes beyond that. So what other
uh aspects does it include?
Yeah. Um So we really struggled with this and
this is actually part of the reason that we
did the project to begin with because strength sports,
the definition of strength sports is a sport that
is about the uh oh as heavy as one
can do one kind of event like the, the
sheer movement of force. And we didn't include like
sports that you strength to, to help them be
better at something else like rugby or American football,
um or combat sports such as boxing or um
M ma we were, we were just interested in
or even bodybuilding. Bodybuilding is about performance and posing
where the strength sports we looked at powerlifting, crossfit,
weightlifting, strong man, highland games tournament. We're about how
heavy can you go? How much strength and brute
force do you have? And brute force has always
kind of been around kind of a very masculine
domain, domain. The idea of like lifting as much
as possible, a car truck, right. We think about
that with the strong man, um, uh, uh, a
sport and that's very, a very masculine domain. And
so women, there has become, it's become more popular
for women to get in, involved in that. Um,
AND so in that there was like, because there
was like a, it kind of more women participating,
kind of troubled, you know, kind of shook up
a little bit about what is, what is strength,
how do we think about that? And so we
wanted to push past just this brute force sort
of understanding to think about what are the things
are necessary to be good at these sports? They
include race and like flexibility and mobility and agility
and technique and like self-confidence and coordinating and collective
action and solidarity and the social elements. And so
we kind of added those to this idea of
strength because when you go and you participate in
these sports and you try to perform a one
time really heavy lift, there's so much more that
goes into that, whether it's team building, whether it's
proper nutrition, whether it's having a coach, whether it's
psychological uh capacities to be able to do that.
Um And so we were, we sort of wanted
to think about it as instead of just that
one time performance, what is it like to sort
of do this regularly as a practice? Um And
we weren't even just interested in like elite athletes,
we're looking at like everyday men and women who
have to kind of do this over and over
again. Um And so we we were interested in
kind of really just troubling that definition, that strength
is just about kind of physical capacity to lift
something really heavy, takes so much more than that.
So in this particular case, I mean, according to
the view you bring into the book, it intersects
with gender constructs as well,
right? Yeah, absolutely. Because oftentimes almost, you know, so
many times just strength is linked to masculinity, right?
And you know, just on everyday levels, a woman
will lift up something heavy and a man will
come in and be like, I got it, don't
worry, and they'll try to do it for that
person. Um And then in, in an embodied form.
So in not only just the moving strength, but
also strength is also linked to muscularity, kind of
the embodied form of it. If you see somebody
very muscular, there's often assumptions about, oh, that person
must be really strong. And um and women are
really have historically and con temporarily there's problems with
having a lot of muscle. Your question, your femininity
is questioned. And so we were really interested in
kind of how, how gender those elements were, how
like lifting heavy weight was a man's job or
having muscles is a man's thing. And if you
were a woman who had muscles you might be
a man. And so they all of that kind
of really highlights um the sort of nature of
the gender element and also just in general, with,
even like before we get to string sports sports
are one of the last places that we separate
men and women, right, in our workplaces, we don't
separate men and women, churches, religious institutions, social gatherings,
like, you know, some places are still gender, but
really sports is one of the last domains where
like you're only allowed to participate in your gender
group. So um and that, so that's always interesting,
like, so when it the, you know, even our
like in historically, in the United States, we had
segregation of sports based on race and that ended
right 40 years ago, 50 years ago, but we
still have very important demarcated um men's and women's
sports. And so, you know, kind of like, is
it even possible to think about what it would
be like if we actually just pick the best
people regardless of their gender?
Yeah, I guess that will come to that question
when we talk a little bit later about trans
women in strength sports and also sports in general
because there's a huge debate right now about trans
women in sports. I mean, mo it, it's mostly
unfortunate but we're going to get into that. But
when it's very interesting that you talk about how
in human societies, we tend to associate muscularity with
masculinity. Because also sometimes if, for example, uh a
straight man and I guess that that is one
aspect of feminism that uh if we explore here,
people will see that it can also apply to
men and all men themselves can sometimes be discriminated
in certain ways. If a strength, if a straight
man uh says that he is attracted to a
woman who is particularly muscular, sometimes people find that
a little bit weird and sometimes they even uh
question his own sexual orientation.
Right. Yep. Absolutely. The link to, to muscularity as
a gender domain is really entrenched. It's very hard
to overcome that even like, you know, men will
go into the gyms and only want to build
muscle and they'll do all these extra kinds of
like performance enhancing drugs and put that in their
body in order to be more muscular and women
will go in and, and not wanna lift weights
because they don't wanna get bulky, they only wanna
tone. Um And where the, the thing is is
as a, I'm an, an anthropologist. So we do
a, you know, part of our perspective is evolutionary
and as Homo sapiens, you know, humans are not,
there's like the uh sexual dimorphism which means like
vast differences between, between sexes in terms of size.
Um GORILLAS are a very good example of, of
like really strong sexual dimorphism. The males are much
bigger than the females. Humans are not like that.
We actually, there's a lot of women who are
as big and tall as men and there are
a lot of men who are on the smaller
side. And so the range of like, you know,
of what is a typical size for a man
and a woman is very much a similar capacity.
And so, and that's interesting. So it's like, so
even biologically, we're not meant to be that big,
you know, that different physiologically. Um And you know,
there's, there's, and women, there's like a been a
new uh article from one of our contributors, Kara
Aach wrote an article in Scientific American where she
looked at kind of the historical, the archaeological, the
paleolithic evidence of humans. Um And they capacities, there
are different kinds of hormones as well as their
musculature um in their bones, right? In the evidence
of the bones that men and women were both
hunting, men and women were both making clothes like
their skeletons. Have we've all been men and women
um in the historical and archaeological and pale record
have, you know, there's no evidence that men were
much stronger or bigger than women or even that
they were using their muscles more um more so
than women. And so it's just kind of been
more recently where we sort of separated. Um THIS,
having this understanding that women don't have the capacity.
And there's a joke on the internet where it's
funny because men will say you'll never hear a
man say, oh that's a lady shark. I'm not
scared of her to this idea of like female
sharks versus male sharks being kind of both very
dangerous. But we say that about women like, oh
females, female human are not supposed to be strong
or muscular or big or, you know, um and
we would never do that for another, another species.
So it, it comes, it comes much more or
less from biology and more from, you know, cultural
uh and, and power dynamics um in our societies.
Uh But since there's also at least to some
extent that biological element here when it comes to,
and of course, we're talking about averages here, but
on average, I guess that we could say that
men tend to be a little bit more muscular
than women on average again, and a little bit
stronger than women. But do you think that perhaps
some of these social expectations or uh gender constructs
also derive at least in part from those average
biological differences that, that average sexual dimorphism, let's say.
So there is, there are obvious biological differences between
males and females, no question. Um But I think
really a lot of our science on that is
actually because we haven't really looked at a lot
about women, we've just kind of focused on men.
So there's a recent study and recent information um
by Joseph Thornton um out of the University of
Chicago that argues and illustrates that um estrogen as
an anabolic hormone, which is muscle building hormone is
like twice as old as testosterone. And so this
idea that estrogen is not something that is about
muscle building or muscle endurance or muscle maintaining is
actually not true. But our science, there's so much
inherent about science that like, oh men were hunters,
there was a book that came out in the
sixties that said that and it was like scientific
and so people believed it. So I think what
we're, what we're seeing now is there's a lot
of push to do more research with women on
biolog of women, on female athletes, on questions about
human biology from a, a feminist perspective or just
looking at the difference between men and women. Um,
AND sort of looking at that we don't a,
we don't really know as much as we think
we do right now. And what are some of
the things that we actually, um, some of the
things we're learning is that it's not as separated
by the sexes as we thought?
Mhm. And also, I guess that another thing to
consider here is that even though there are those
biological differences, it's not that they can't be changed
by certain habits that people might have. So, for
example, if a man does not do any physical
exercise at all, it can be, uh, weak or
weaker than, let's say, average man and the woman,
if she's into, I don't know, weightlifting powerlifting if
she goes to the gym and lifts weights, uh,
I mean, she can become actually quite strong.
Right. Mhm. Absolutely. And that's part of it. Every,
so this idea that we have innate genetic ability
is really, you know, I mean, there's very little
there that you have to cultivate, that you have
to practice. So you have to, you know, um,
and so that's part of it and it's, you
know, this assumption that all men are better than
all women is really wrong. In fact, you will
find right? There are some women who are genetically
better capa have better capacities to do certain things.
And then if they cultivate it, they're gonna be
better than, you know, then lots of men and,
you know, maybe 95% of other, of men in
the world. Like if you look at, we have
this young female, uh Olympic weightlifter named Olivia Reeves.
She's like 21 years old. She's the 71 kg
lifter and she is, she's, you know, she's one
of the, she's won the, this world cup. She's
the strongest woman at that weight in, you know,
the world and has world records. Um But men
in her gym will still try to compete with
her and she like, if she competed, you know,
like more, she can just, you know, easily, front
squat 330 pounds, easily, back squat 440 pounds and
she's like 100 and 50 pounds. And so it's
like this understanding that she, she has genetic capacity
to be an amazing, strong, she's like built to
be strong and then she cultivates it. Um But
men will go into her gym and think that
they just should automatically be stronger than her because
they're men and that's where we really need to
push back on that. Like the, the average is
so like we are so like overlapping our Venn
diagrams of men and women in terms of abilities
and sizes are really overlapped. The outliers might be,
you know, kind of where you see it, but
it's, you know, for the most part, you know,
you, you can, you know, and men have more,
have more home like testosterone and are built to
be more, you know, one time heavy, really heavy,
do it really fast where women have more estrogen,
which is an anabolic steroid or anabolic hormone, muscle
building that actually has a lot more to do
with, you know, sort of strength endurance. So they
can do a lot of heavy lifting for a
lot longer. Um And so it's, you know, it's
kind of like, what exactly are we testing or
competing against? And, um, and that, you know, there's
actually a lot more overlap than we like to
think from both a training perspective and even a
hormonal perspective,
right? Uh So w would you like to tell
us a little bit about, uh, I mean, sort
of the history of strength sports, particularly, uh, how
women first got into strength sports. How old you
are? Strength sports, basically, uh, uh, uh, I mean,
basically give us a, an overview, a brief overview
of, uh, women in strength sports, I guess historically.
So, um, string sports, like the ones that I
listed, um, some, you know, the idea of moving
a one object that's really heavy. There's like all
kinds of, like in the basque region, there's like
these large stones that people will lift and move
and those have a large, like a much longer
history than like official organized, like associations or federations
and who knows what men and if women were
participating in that, um, before, but I'll give an
example using the sport of Olympic weightlifting since we've
got the Olympics coming up. Um, AND that's the
sport that's in the Olympics. It's a strength sport.
It's, it's, uh, there's two events, the snatch and
the clean and jerk. It's with the barbell. Um
And so if you watch the Olympics and seen
the sport, it's kind of like known and it
was the o the, you know, contemporary Olympics were
started again back again, even though they're from antiquity
in Greece, they started the, the modern ones in
like 18 nineties and Olympic weightlifting was in the
first Olympics. It was, but only for men. Um,
AND then there were a number of other Olympics
and, but it was only until 1920 so 100
years ago that weightlifting was a regular sport in
the Olympics. And so, uh, but that was only
for men. It was only until 2000, the Sydney
Olympics. So that this century that women were allowed
to compete in Olympic weightlifting. And the question is,
did they not want to lift or like, what
was, what was that? There had been women in
the Olympics much earlier that in, in many other
sports, right? Um But the idea that a strength
sport, this idea of brute strength and moving as
much weight from the ground to overhead, which is
essentially what weightlifting is, didn't let women participate for
80 years. Um And currently in the, in the
United States, uh Olympic, weightlifting is a predominantly female
sport. There's like 60% at various competitions that are
women than men. Um And so it's, it, the,
you know, part of the argument is, you know,
why weren't women supposed to participate in that? And
then, but also looking at how recently they have
allowed women at like the most elite levels to
participate in that. And women, you know, depends on
different parts of the world. Um Eastern European European
countries, Russia, China, Central uh Asian countries and um
Iran, Iraq, Georgia, Armenia, uh have all long histories
um of weight lifting and are some of the
best teams, best nation states in the world. Um
And sometimes they, they have very few women still
participate in those countries in the sport. Um, AND
they are, even though these men, the men in
these countries dominate the men's weight classes. Um, THE
women actually are, you know, more Chinese, some Colombians,
Americans. Um, AND, um, you know, there's a handful
of other, of other, uh elite countries as well,
but it's interesting that a lot of the places
that even the men have always dominated in weightlifting,
um, don't have a strong female cohort. So it's
almost like we're seeing it unfold in real time
where, um, women, there was a focus in the
United States, at least to include more women in
all kinds of sports. In the 19 seventies, there
was a law passed, women used to be able
to play just tennis and maybe a little bit
of golf, but mostly it was tennis and then,
so it's only in the last 50 years that
women in general were kind of a allowed to
participate or encourage. And um, there was money and
focus to get them to participate in sports and
strength sports are because it's about power and brute
strength. Um, IN general are like lagging behind in
terms of because they, they're thought of as male
dominated and masculine sports more than, more than others
say gymnastics, correct. So,
a and where do you think that this sort
of exclusion for such a long time stemmed from,
was it again societal expectations, gender roles or what?
Exactly?
I mean, I think that part of it is
just gender roles, like it starts out that way,
the idea, you know, a lot of times in
contemporary, in a lot of contemporary American societies, there's
a lot of, there's like a public uh realm
which is sort of the masculine or male dominated
realm and then the domestic realm, which is, um,
the women's realm and something like even fitness, like
exercise used to in the United States. The, on
the main way that women could exercise was through
the television, through Jack LaLanne and his television show.
So they didn't necessarily even get fitness out in
the gym, they got fitness in their home because
that's where they were and men were in gyms
or doing sports or like part, you know, playing
out there on the courts or the pit is,
um, out there in the public realm. And so
a part of it is that, is just that
basic understanding of like where men and women can
be in the working world or in the domestic
world. And then this idea of sports is entertainment
is also a really important element. Um, THAT'S used
a lot of times still to be like, oh,
well, women's sports isn't that entertaining or in order
for it to be entertaining, they have to wear
really skimpy clothing and be very, it's kind of
sexualized. And so there's still a lot of this
kind of like, prejudice about a women's sports isn't
interesting. It's not entertaining and, you know, men don't
want to watch it. And so therefore we're not
gonna, you know, we're not gonna have it on
television or fund it. Um, BUT I, you know,
there's a good example. That's interesting. This year is,
there was this young woman named Caitlin Clark, um,
who is a basketball player for the University of
Iowa, which has never been a dominant basketball college.
And, um, you know, men's men's basketball is very,
very popular in the United States and it's also
very popular worldwide, but women's basketball is not. And
there is, even though we have a professional women's
league in the United States, the W NBA. Um,
BUT this Caitlin Clark, more, more men and women
watched her college games this year than any other
basketball game in like 10 years, men or women.
And so this understanding that women are, you know,
kind of pushing a little bit using this young
woman who's, you know, capac cities are, are extraordinary,
kind of actually troubled a little bit, you know,
the assumption that women's basketball or other women's sports
aren't interesting or fun or entertaining to watch. And
so that has changed the act, she has changed
the economics of the W NBA by just being
like, like she just got drafted, um, and being
in college. So I think we're, you know, we're
kind of trying to trouble that a little bit,
you know, but it's, it's still really lagging behind
because of just basic assumptions and prejudices about, about
men and women and what's fun to watch and
what's interesting.
Mhm. You know, I, I'm really fascinated by this
because, uh, as I told you before we started
recording, I follow American wrestling, like wweaew stuff like
that. And, uh, I've been following it since the
early two thousands, so, almost 20 years now. And,
uh, I've seen lots of, uh, transformation evolution in
terms of how women were presented in the early
two thousands versus how they are presented. I mean,
in the early two thousands, they were basically eye
candy and now they are actual athletes and they
compete in actual uh fights. Uh uh And uh
it's, and even right now, uh wrestling fans whenever
they do not give the women good storylines or
good fights, they get mad. So even the expectations
of wrestling fans changed over time just because at
a certain point in WW for example, it was
the mid 20 tens, they started pushing more and
more for women's wrestling and they have an entire
pay per view just with women in 2018. So
sometimes even just you marketing more women sports also
changes people's expectations and they get exposed to it
and then they notice that, oh, wait a minute,
perhaps women are just as athletic as men. So
and entertaining. That is an excellent example. It's like,
oh, it turns out men also do want to
watch women in the WWE like, that's that assumption
is that they didn't, is, you know, is often
an assumption. So, and also like, people assume it
themselves, they're like, well, I've never watched a woman
and they have these terrible storylines but give them
good storylines, give them like kind of some cool
stuff and have them be athletic and compete and
you're like, I'm rooting for the woman. So, yeah,
I think it's also, you know, and we've also
just kind of, there's been a lot more social
media has really helped with this as, you know,
media exposure can, is, is become a little bit
more democratic. So even if you weren't on ESPN
or on, you know, their own channels, you know,
people were sports and fitness used Instagram um to
push out different notions and to get like really
interesting examples of people kind of embodying different sorts
of, you know, kind of pushing against some of
these gendered embodiment of prejudices and notions and people
are like, 00 wow, women can be strong. And
so I think that really helped then it becomes
a lot more mainstream, you know, and WWE and
crossfit are really good examples of one recognizing and
respecting the capacity of women and have them kind
of competing against men head on rather than just
themselves. And that's, you know, that's really, that's a
really great and interesting thing just to kind of,
you know, shake it up a little bit and
see what falls out.
I mean, actually, it's interesting that you mentioned that
sometimes women compete against men, uh, in wrestling as
well because actually in wrestling, there's a long tradition
even though it's not that common of inter g
wrestling. And I mean, the wrestling fan do not
care at all about, uh, uh, if women compete
with men or vice versa, as long as the
fight is good enough and the storyline is also
good enough. I mean, we don't care at all
about gender categories there.
And I think that's a really good example like,
you know, that, that some of this stuff we
think is really entrenched or even biological, actually may
not be that entrenched. And maybe, right, let's see
how it goes. And I think that's a really
good example, like I don't care who it is.
I want, you know, that woman and that woman
on my team, if I'm, you know, that's who
I like and I'm gonna show up to watch
him. So that's great.
So uh let's talk a little bit now about,
of course, a very contagious issue that people in
politics generally, particularly in the US have been discussing
a lot in recent years. Uh Let's talk a
little bit about trans women in just sports and
also sports more generally because the argument they make
here is about sports as a broad category. So
what do you think is the main issue here?
Why do you think that people have been reacting
so aggressively to trans women in sports.
I think a lot of it has to do
with the just how gendered sports are, period, right?
So we, you know, in say the Olympics just
because it's coming up and it's a really good
example. Um BUT everywhere it's like you have the
men's teams and the women's teams or the men's
swimming and the women's swimming. And so because instead
of just, you know, the Portuguese and the Americans,
and then we're gonna have mixed gender kind of
like wrestling, you know, so part of it is
just that we still separate men and women and
we do that because we have these inherent understandings
about biology. Um And that is, and a lot
of the gender stuff is based on the, the
understanding of biological sex that there's two sexes and
that's it. And there's all kinds of, you know,
science uh that argue, right? There's a continuum um
of, of human homo SAPIEN sort of gender um
aspects and sexual aspects. Like we can't, not everybody
nice and neatly fits into just male or female.
And we categorize that based on like reproductive systems
or hormones or like chromosomes, X and Y. But
we know that there's so many humans with like
XXY and XYY and bearing hormone, you know, uh
ranges and then also there's, there's uh men and
women who have both sexual reproductive organs. Um And
so those aren't, you know, those are not, these
are not outside of the norm of human experience.
Um, BUT we don't, you know, are a lot
of times our, we have kind of work sort
of solidified in this as male and female. Um,
SO I think that's part of it is just
that we aren't as like we've so, so quickly.
So, and so, uh, historically just had to decide
if somebody was a male or female at, you
know, at birth based on looking at, you know,
their, their genitalia when they come out. And um
and then, but really, that's much more complicated than
that. And um we're just starting to see how
that's the case, but that has really prevented. So,
and, and transgender men and women is, is about
experiences of themselves in a particular body and maybe
that doesn't who they experience themselves to be. It
does not match with sort of the biological body
that they have. And so part of it is
like, so then there's this disjuncture of like, can
you then ma can you then as a transgender
woman say, if you were assigned male at birth,
become a woman, like, do you do that biologically?
And then how would you do that biologically? Is
there? You know, and the only place that we
have to like, prove that we're men and women
is in sport, right? You don't have to go
to work and prove you're a man, no one's
gonna ask you to write in and in women's
sports, historically, women have had to like, be examined
by doctors or sh the private parts to, you
know, representatives, they've had like, they've had, you know,
elements of themselves, like measured in order to prove
that they're women. And so that's really, you know,
a violation of your own personal space. And the
only place that we demand that is in sport.
So it's really important to kind of like think
about that. But women have been policed for, for
a really long time to make sure that they
are actual women. Um And this has, you know,
a good example of that is uh Semenya who
is the um the 800 m runner out of
South Africa. And she uh has, she's a um
uh athletics, she competes in athletics and she has
been um in constant battle with the International Association
for Athletics and the, and the Olympic Committee that
she experiences herself as a woman. She has, she
has been, she has a particular kind of hormone
that is associated with men. So her ranges um
of and it's not testosterone. Um AND she turns
out she has both reproductive organs. So instead of
ovaries, she has testes and she doesn't have maybe
a uterus, but she, she is a different kind
of woman, that's how she understands herself. Um But
because there might be some sort of, she might
have a capacities, inherent biological capacities based on those
things to make her better. They don't let her
compete in the sport. And that's where it gets
interesting because there are all kinds of biological advantages
that people are automatically born with that make them
better at a sport. So if you are born
7 ft tall, you are gonna be really good
at basketball. You might be really good at basketball.
People are gonna think you're good at basketball and
they may spend all this money to get you
a coach and for you to practice and then
you can make millions of dollars in, you know,
basketball leagues. That is never considered unfair. That is
never police, no one is ever kicked out of
basketball because they're too tall or even too short.
But it's this idea that people can be born
with biological advantages and the only ones that are
policed are gender aspects. And so part of it
is just we really need to kind of like,
kind of really be critical about some of those
assumptions that we have, um, about what is, what
is a man or a woman period, but then
also what parts of our biology are considered fair
and unfair? And why is it always about gender
and why is it always about women? And why
have we always police women and those women who
were like, really good, we questioned whether they were
really women and that has a long history in
all kinds of sports and part of it is
that, you know, being really athletic and a having
athletic prowess has been considered a male domain. And
so if you're a woman who's really good or
really muscular or really fast, they don't think you're
a woman. And so that's where we just need
to kind of really think about the historical and
cultural legacies of those kinds of things. And then,
and to say, like, you know, I do people
who are transgender really have a lot of unfair
advantage. Is that really possible? And first of all,
how many transgender women and men are there out
there trying to compete? And then second of all,
like, do they win every time they go out
there? That's the, that's the fears that they're gonna
always win. And that's not the case. There's a
Laurel Laurel Hubbard who uh who is a weightlifter
strength sport athlete in 2020 the Tokyo Games. Um
SHE competed and she was born a male, born,
assigned male at birth and then ran uh transitioned
and she got seven. She didn't win. So yes,
she's really good, but she's also been doing weightlifting
for like most of her life. So, is it
because she's a transgender woman that she's really good?
She's seven. She didn't win all the women in
her category who were not transgender, beat her, you
know, so those are the kinds of things where
we need to actually see examples. We need to
like let inclusion to really see if like they're
always gonna win. Um And you know, to kind
of understand some of some of our own kind
of shackles of why we think these, the way
we think. And there's a really, I think there's
part of this idea that and this, this is,
has been a fear for a long time is
that men are gonna dress up as women and
compete right. There were his, there was like a
whole bunch of like rumors in the 19 eighties
at the Olympics that, that the Soviet unit had
sent men disguised as women to compete in women's
activities. Um And so there's like a long history
of sport and, and mediocre kind of men getting
to beat all the women. And I, again, that's
just this assumption that, you know, men are inherently
better than women. Um AND that men are gonna
disguise themselves or even undergo a sexual transition or,
and gender identity transition in order to compete in
a sport. And then that, that's like gonna change
their whole identity. Like a lot of that stuff
is just fear mongering and like really kind of
concerns about things that really are there. You know
that they're not, they're moral panics, right? They're kind
of like conjuring up this like fear when there's
really no evidence of, right? It being a problem
and uh you know, whether participating, where men are
not disguising themselves and transgender women aren't always winning.
So, like what is really the issue, um, about,
you know, that kind of thing and, you know,
that's sort of the, the, I think some of
the concern about it and why we shouldn't be
as concerned, I think as we are.
So, uh, I might be missing the mark here
with what I'm about to say and if I'm
wrong, please correct me. But, uh, I mean, what
I hear mostly from conservative right wing people in
the US, particularly when it comes to the issue
of the issue of transwomen in sports is that
they are trying to protect as they say, women
sports. But one thing that I find really curious
about this is that so until very recently, uh
y you didn't care and by you, I mean,
they, they didn't care at all about women's sports.
I mean, they even bash women's sports, they say
that women are weaker than men. They say that
soccer players, I mean, female soccer players are much
worse than men, soccer players or male soccer players
and all of that. And now suddenly, just because
there are, uh there is a tiny number of
trans women, trans people wanting to compete uh in
women's sports. You're worried about we're protecting women's sports.
I mean, it, it, I, I mean, as I
said, I might be missing the mark here but
it seems to me extremely obvious that the issue
is that they are transphobic. It's not that they
care about protecting women's sports at all.
Right. I would absolutely agree with you. And it's,
it's just kind of another turn. They're very much,
uh, there's a lot of like, uh, fear or
hate against queer people in general, whether it's gay
lesbian marriage issues. Um, BUT so that's an inherent
kind of conservative, um, perspective. And then it's also
like, policing of women in general, right? Conservative politics,
especially in the United States is, is very much
about policing women, right? Um We see this now
in the sort of transformation of our abortion rights
and act. Um AND, you know, penalizing people who
help women who, you know, get an abortion, not
allowing women to get abortion even in dire circumstances.
And so that's like the whole pro life situation,
but it's not, it's less about life again and
it's a lot about policing. Um So I think
there's less that's kind of the patriarchal of, there's
a, it's a lot about control, it's a lot
about controlling women. It's a lot about controlling sport.
It's a lot about controlling politics. Um And these
are men making these decisions or they're women who
are kind of patriarchal as well. And they're also,
they think that, you know, women, transgender women are
gonna take their daughters spot or their spot. And
there's just, you're right, like, it's just, it comes
from, you know, a perspective that is, you know,
a lot about hate and a lot about um
you know, policing women and having and continuing a
particular form of patriarchal um domination as an ideology
in the United States, for sure.
Uh But taking into account that there are uh
biological differences, differences in terms of genes, hormones across
people. Uh AND some of these differences might bring
advantages to a few people out there. Uh In
what ways do you think that sports should work
if they are not a gendered? I mean, in
what uh would there still be, should there still
be categories? And if so what kinds of categories?
I mean, I think this is an excellent question
and it's even somebody who studies sports, this is
such a like it's hard to even think outside
of that gender box, right? Like, oh, I didn't
even know that was an option, right? And it
is an option when you have little kids, right?
Or WWE is a good example where you're like,
oh, look at him play and that girl is
faster than that boy and that girl is stronger
than that one and that boy is taller and
you know, like you look at like I have
got two nieces and they are both the tallest
people in their classes hands down. So will that
always be the case? Who knows? Like we, we
grow in different times and places? Um So I
think that, you know, maybe it could be about
like ability, like levels of like, you know, kind
of novice, intermediate elite and kind of thinking about,
you know, not only just, you know, your genetic
capacities but also like, how much training do you
have, how much effort have you put into it?
How many, how many years have you been doing
this sport? And also like, you know, you're not
gonna have a lot of people like doing ice
hockey and, you know, say Kenya, right, the whole,
like, there was like that show about the like
Jamaican bobsledders, right? This idea of like, you know,
there's all different kinds of reasons that people don't
do sports and people do sports, right? Some like,
I, I love the country of Georgia and there
they have amazing weightlifters, but they're not necessarily playing
baseball, but that's like to be, you know, but
they have like this long heritage of like this
being a strong weightlifter and so culturally nation, like
we all, there's all different kinds of reasons why
we go to different sports and participate in those
kinds of sports and have an identity based on
that. So I think that we could think about
it, you know, in different kinds of ways could,
you know, we have all these leagues around the
world, like the, the American Basketball Association and then,
you know, the European one and like all, like,
what if we sort of like, thought about, you
know, different kinds of ways of like, you know,
including more people from different parts of the world
to do winter sports, if they don't have snow
or, you know, if there's like, the, the, the
possibility is actually endless of how we could think
about these things. Um, WE just really haven't tried
and I think that there's, you know, there's, there's
ways in which we could just, you know, like,
if we're gonna, if we're going to think about
competing, right, winning, which is a lot about what
sports is, right? Sports has this understanding that there's
a winner and a loser. Um It also has
a, has a rhetoric and a, an ideology about
being fair. Um Right, nowhere else are we sort
of as concerned about fairness, um, as we are
in sport and uh very rarely and so kind
of thinking about the ways in which we could,
you know, get the best people, whatever they look
like whatever gender they are um to be on
teams and how might we understand those teams. So,
I think there's all different kinds of ways to
think about it and we just really haven't done
a whole lot of it. So what if we,
what if we tried?
Uh, SO, but in the particular case of strength
sports and fight and many fight sports there are,
for example, weight categories. Do you think that at
least those we should keep or not? So,
I think that's a right, that's a good way
to do it where, you know, we could because
that's part like lifting strong, heavy weight. It's depending
on how big you are perhaps. I mean, that's
an, that's an assumption about it. Right. A small
person, 55 kg is not gonna lift as much
as a super heavyweight who could be as heavy
as, you know, 100 and 80 kg. So, very
different. Um, SO maybe, yeah, maybe we do weight
classes or we do, you know, the class is
based on experience or classes based on a test
in a level, like if you run a certain
weight or run a certain time or lift a
certain weight, no matter what gender you are, you
get to be in the, in the top group.
And so then you can can, you know, compete.
Um So I think there's all different kinds of
ways, you know, those are still even a little
gendered. Um The women's heavyweight is, you know, 87
in weightlifting is 87 kg plus which is not
a very big person, right? That's not a, you
know, a, a heavy person really in terms of
like, but everybody over that weight is considered a
super heavyweight. And so I think we just need
to think about like humans of all of all
ilks are getting bigger. And so like, let's think
about kind of the range of human um um
bodies rather than just that women should be smaller
than, you know, men's men's super heavyweight is 109.
And so you know, that's like that can be
a considerable difference. So I, yeah, like weight classes,
uh abilities, ages, um you know, length of doing
it, uh all different tests, you know, if you
have like things that are timed or weighted, you
know, having a test to get into the super
lead or the intermediate categories. So, and even have
your best men and women on the basketball court,
say like a team sport or in a, in
a relay or, you know, kind of to be
the fastest people out there because you have a
lot of women, like the 100 m dash, you
know, who are competing at the Olympics, they are
faster than 99% of the male population, right? So
kind of thinking about it, you know, pushing ourselves
and it's hard, I think for sport to think
about it that way. But WWE is a good,
is a good way to, is a good, you
know, I'm glad I'm glad you have that experience
because that's like, yeah, like who would have thought
they'd be so progressive? You know, they're pushing us
to think about it and that's great. Yeah,
I, I guess that they found out that there's
good money for them to make.
Well, exactly when you like limit women's participation, you're
alienating half of the population and their income. Like,
what are you doing? Get them to the floor,
get him into the ring, get him into the
stands, you know, get them onto the couch to
watch it and you, it's surprising. It's like, amazing.
Yeah.
Yeah. No, you, you know, it's very interesting. I
never thought about things like this but since I
also follow soccer and different soccer leagues in Europe,
uh, one thing that never crossed my mind was
that you mentioned, for example, age there in terms
of a category we could use. But in soccer,
for example, people do not care about age at
all. I mean, you have 30 year olds competing
with even 16 year olds, sometimes 18 year olds
and, uh, the 30 year olds are much more
experienced and, uh, I, I mean, they are older,
of course, uh, and people do not care about
that at all. So that's just another example of
how perhaps we have to look at things on
a case by case basis. And what I is
common in a particular sport is what people find
normal because no one questions that role in soccer,
for example.
Exactly. And think about how much different you are
at 30 than, than you were at 16 and
like what parts are actually better, right. So you're
much more calm, you're much more strategic. You might
know that you've had longer to do it. You
like can read the field better. You like have
this intelligence and this maybe psychological like, you know,
calm to, to, like, take a, you know, a,
you know, a, a penalty kick when the 16
year olds are like, all nerves and they may
have these great skills but they don't have that,
like, and so is that unfair? We would never
say that would be unfair. We just think that,
oh, that element of it just makes them better,
um, in that kind of way. So, I think,
like, that's the kind of stuff we just, you
know, we really need to think about, like, so
many things make somebody good at a sport that
are beyond and above the genetic and biological. And
so, and if we want to talk about fairness,
we've got to talk about all that kind of
stuff. And when do we decide that's not fair,
it's very rare, like somebody born with a genetic
component that makes them really tall or have in
weightlifting, the idea is to have a long torso
and short arms and legs. So somebody born like
that is, could possibly be an amazing Olympic champion,
but that would never be considered like unfair. So,
you know, but economics funding training, history, like maturity,
you know, support all of those kinds of things.
Also come into the idea of like all of
that also shapes the fairness of it, you know.
So there's also a, a very interesting topic that
uh you explore in the book, uh related to
pregnancy in sport. So this is of course a
very uh female issue in this particular case. So
what are the challenges that pregnant strength athletes face.
So by first of all, biologically, the idea that
you a pregnant woman and then a postpartum woman,
you are build pregnancy, you're building another human being
in your body. So that takes a lot of
extra calories, lots of extra rest, lots of all
kinds of things in order to just be, you
know, a, a person in the world let alone
to compete in a sport or continue to be
fit and then post uh post birth. Um A
lot of women breastfeed and so their bodies are
the soul are still for another number of months,
still. The pri the only way in which a
baby gets any kind of nutrition and grows. So,
first of all, it's just biologically this idea that
you are building a human being and creating a
human building, you know, being for at least a
year, right? For, for a lot of women, if
not more. Um AND then there's all the different
kinds of changes that happen. A lot of, you
know, there's different kinds of hormones that make your
joints relax or, you know, have uh you know,
different kinds of like less, less aggression and more
sort of loving um notions. Um And so that
can change whether or not you can do strength
sports, like lift really heavy. If your joints are
really lax, you may be, you may hurt yourself.
Um So there's all kinds of biological issues that
sort of prevent it. But they're also like you,
there's a lot of evidence that, uh, my, again,
my friend, uh, Ka Aach is a biological anthropologist.
And, um, you know, there's just, there's, you know,
evidence in the, um, in fossil, there's fossil evidence
that women while pregnant were still doing all the
things that they can do. And this is the
case women can continue, you know, a lot of
women can continue to do a lot of normal
things while being pregnant. And if you're used to
training and you're used to pushing yourself, um doing
a strength sport before you get pregnant, you know,
there's a lot of evidence that you can continue
to do that even, even as you get, you
know, get, um, get bigger with a belly or
the um get closer to, to birth. And there's
like tons of examples of women who have been
elite athletes who continue to do their sport for
long into their pregnancy and then shortly after they
give birth, they'll, you know, they'll um, continue to
train or compete. Um, SO there's, and that's not
all women. Some women have complications in their pregnancies,
obviously. Um, BUT this idea that women aren't supposed
to do things like that, lift heavy or run
fast or run far is I think is, is
kind of a misunderstanding and just assumptions about kind
of policing women and their participation anyway. Um, YOU
know, biological evidence is that women can continue to
do a lot of that stuff and a are
actually like estrogen is like an inherent muscular endurance,
anabolic that helps them do that. We actually have
been kind of evolved to, to be able to
like build humans and continue to like, be in
the world in a very physical way. Um As
you know, there's evidence of that. So it's not
that we, we shouldn't just, you know, kind of
not do anything. Um So I think that's part
of it is like, is there's a misconception about
what women should be able to do and that's
kind of because of the medical field there, but
there isn't a lot of, you know, that some
of the science in, in medicine um is lacking
about uh you know, menstruation for women as well
as pregnancies for women and as well as post
partum. Um And so we're starting to rectify that
there's a lot more research on, on that kind
of uh on that, on experiences and biological evidence
of these kinds of things. Um But there's understandings
about what makes a good mother and including during
pregnancy and post pregnancy. And I think that is
what kind of polices women more than anything. So
the article in the book or the chapter in
the book that looks at that looks at like
posts uh Instagram um and social media posts that
women who are strength athletes who are continuing to
lift really heavy, you know, with maybe their outfits
on their video or sports bra, little and little
shorts and then their belly is sticking out and
they're lifting a big barbell and it looks like
it's a lot of weight and it's heavy, maybe
less weight than what they have been able to
do. Maybe they have taken weight off the barbell
because they're not feeling as strong, but they're still
doing their sport. And the comments in those in
those videos are really about, you know, kind of
challenging this woman's good motherhood and that's how they
frame it. Like you're not a good mother because
you're doing this. And so, and in the United
States, we see this a lot of time where
the priority of the child in utero and, and
out of utero um is really kind of the
focus and women's joy health like well being is
really kind of put on the back burner once
they become um pregnant or become a mother. And
so I think that's part of that is like
thinking about, you know, why do we not care
about women's mental health, physical health ability to perform
their sports and their activities, especially if it's like
an income generation thing. Like if you're a pro
pro athlete and you are, you know, and, and
Alex and Felix is a good, is a good
example of this. She is this, you know, uh
most, you know, gold medal athlete in the world
in, in track and field and Nike who was,
her sponsor was like, well, we're not gonna pay
for you while you're pregnant. And she couldn't believe
it. Like, all of a sudden, you know, this
was like, and so they weren't committed to her
as a person they were committed to, you know,
so she, like, dropped them and went with a
women owned, um, athletic company and she came in,
you know, postpartum, like a 10 months postpartum after
ac section, which is a major surgery and she
won her 12th Olympic gold medal after she was
pregnant after surgery. And, and Nike didn't want, didn't
want to support her during her pregnancy during a
very short window where she didn't train. So she
was training so much of that time and Nike
didn't. So I think Nike now has changed their
policies. Um But that's because someone as elite as
Alex and Felix had to push back on that.
So, and that's recent, she was an Olympian, you
know, like in the 2000 tens. So it's just
now that we're even thinking about like by a
lot, you know, like what can women do while
pregnant? Um And then letting them decide and not
policing them based on some kind of misunderstandings from
the medical field or patriarchal assumptions about where, what's,
where is the woman's place. Um And just what
you can, you know, biologically do might be an
individual basis if you never strength trained before you
do it, you start it while pregnant. Probably not
a good idea. But if you're an athlete who's
been doing this sport and of, of, uh, crossfit
or powerlifting or weightlifting for years and then do
that while you're pregnant and then shortly after you,
you give birth, that's probably not as big of
a deal as we think.
Mhm. Uh, I mean, I guess that, uh, all
of what you said there connects to the fact
that because women are the ones who can get
pregnant and the ones who give birth, unfortunately, in
human societies there's this very strong tendency to police
women's, uh, pregnancies, sexual behavior if they ever have
kids or not. I mean, and sometimes it even
gets contradictory because, uh, people are always trying to,
uh, socially enforce this idea that people should have
kids and particularly women should have kids. But at
the same time you mentioned an example there, sometimes
women, if they want to have a ca a
career in whatever kind of domain they get penalized
for getting pregnant and having Children. So, I mean,
it's really, it's a mess.
Yeah. And there's a lot of assumption about like
that they're never gonna be fast again or strong
like that. Something about that giving birth is going
to change their, their bodies and, you know, I
think it's pretty, biologically incredible that a woman can
build a human being and feed a human being
and still perform high levels of activity, you know.
That's an incredible strength capacity of strength. That is
not part of our current definition. Um But what
if it was, you know, what if, you know,
like that's a, that's an above and beyond like
a, you know, strength and endurance thing for a
person to be able to be, do a sport,
train for a sport and build a human being
in their body.
Yeah. So, yeah, since we're also talking about feminism
here, do you think that is a strength sport
specifically can link to women empowerment in any way?
So that was part of our, our focus for
the whole book to begin with. We really wanted
to kind, we sort of the people who do
it kind of feel like it's an element that's
empowering. We are all of a sudden strong, we
can lift our own stuff, we can move our
own beds, we can do these kind, we can
slip our own groceries. Um And then that has
also makes us more confident in ourselves. So a
lot of women in the research I do on
crossfit, they talk about how they use the new
things they're able to do in the gym to
like, be more confident in work. And so things
that like empower them in the gym, empower them
to speak up for themselves at work or to
ask for a raise or to, you know, not
take a lot of flak from men. And it's
really an interesting element this idea of a physical
kind of strength gets sort of transmuted into um
a psychological, a spiritual, a social kind of strength.
Um But there's also oftentimes we have, we found
in our research is that oftentimes women had to
like many other things adapt to the more masculine
or male dominant way of doing things. And so
is there, you know, in, or one of our
interludes, talks about this where one of our Kabak
uh was, you know, started doing some powerlifting and
she felt like she kind of took on a
lot more of an aggressive, dominating, domineering kind of
persona and felt like she had to do that
and she didn't like that about herself. She's like,
is that, that's not what I, how I want
to be. And so thinking about like, how can,
how can we sort of trouble again, this idea
of strength so that it's not just masculine strength
that we think about, but it's like collective strength.
It's about solidarity. One of the big things in
um a lot of neo liberal societies is this
idea that it's about like health and then therefore
strength or even your economic status is all about
your own personal abilities. Um And so strength oftentimes
is about, oh my own capacities and that's less
empowering, that's maybe empowering for one person, but that
becomes also a very just you on your own.
Like, what about community solidarity? What about um that's
what that the gym in El Salvador was this
idea of like, it's not just about me getting
stronger but how can we get our community stronger?
How can we use the gym space to, you
know, break down barrier gender barriers? But what also
can we use it as a like education space?
Can we teach people to read there? Can we
have it as a as a space where we
have different kinds of organizing happen, whether it's political
or religious or what are the kinds of things
that we can use? Not only our gym spaces,
but our mo our move to be stronger, that's
less about the individual body as stronger and competitive
and more about kind of bringing more people up
and, and encouraging other people to sort of be
a part of this in both the physical strength
as well as like that psychological strength that we
talked about.
You know, earlier, I've alluded to the fact that
some of these, particularly the aspects that have to
do with the gender construct, gender expectation, gender roles
also affect men themselves because just to give you
an example and again, since I follow w we,
there's a massive man there, Bronze Roman and he
is like 6 ft seven or eight. I don't
know, he's extremely tall and he's like 150 kg
160 kg, something like that. I mean, he's really
a massive uh person and sometimes in interviews he's
talking about how his uncle passed away, how he
was given an opportunity in WWE to pursue his
dream and so on and he cries a little
bit and sometimes even for a massive man like
that because people have expectations of him being really
an aggressive person, AAA tough man and stuff like
that. Sometimes people call him a cry baby and
I'm like, really, I mean, come on, let just
the men cry if he feels like doing that,
right? I mean, what's the problem with that?
Absolutely. Um I mean, you uh h men are
human, women are human. This idea that men, they
don't have the range of all the human capacities
uh in uh because of their gender is just
a fallacy, right? I mean, if you have little
Children, a boy is gonna cry just as much
as a little girl and in vice and one's
gonna be tougher than the other. Um But we
do then becomes, you know, quickly we sort of
take this human being and we make it into
a gender person and there's so many kind of
regulations about how to be a man or a
woman and a good man or a good woman
or a do the dominant narrative of what a
good man is. Um And that is like so
narrow, right? You have to be strong all the
time. You don't get to have any kind of
weakness. Like that's the number one like way of
thinking about the dominant way to be a man.
And that's just, that's impossible. Like that is literally
humanly impossible. You are gonna either stuff it down
and then, you know, hurt yourself or other people,
you know, or you're gonna like, or you have,
like, because that's just not how humans like operate.
Um And so feminism is like, really about just
kind of liberating men as well as women like
this idea that men get to be all kinds
of things. And in fact, one of the like
the age thing, right, you'll get as older, the
older men get, the more comfortable they are with
a ra you know, if they mature, they get
more comfortable with the range of like being more
emotional or being, you know, so that, and they
don't see that as a sign of weakness, I
think we really need to kind of think about
that. It would be amazing if we could argue
and make the point that like in order to
actually be that vulnerable and to be that kind
of transparent and honest and open with people in
the world that he, that takes a lot of
strength, takes a lot of confidence, right? And so
I think we really need that. This is a
me a moment of where we really need to
think about like what is our definition of strength
and how does it not include actually experiencing joy
and sorrow and anger and love and all of
the different kinds of human experiences that both men
and women and humans of all kinds, you know,
have. Um, AND I think because sport is so
gendered and because we like link so much of
it to men being the best at all kinds
of sports because we, as we've talked about this
whole session, um that, you know, men kind of
giving any sort of like having any give to
that kind of like stoic strength kind of thing
is, you know, is, is sort of understood as
a weakness. And, you know, I don't think that's
true. I think that actually takes a lot of
strength and courage and confidence to, you know, to
be your full self um in the world for
both men and women.
Mhm I mean, on the confident uh uh thing
about it, I, I guess that people don't take
seriously enough how uh in many situations you really
have to be confident to cry in front of
other people because you know how people, how most
people will judge you. And you're basically saying, I
don't even care about it. I mean, I feel
like crying so I'm going to cry and I
don't give a crap about it.
Exactly. A and amazing. Absolutely amazing.
So, uh let me ask you then and this
will be my final couple of questions. So since
your book is also about uh exposing people to
some personal stories, some personal experiences, I want to
ask you about your own personal experience as a
weightlifter. So, uh what would you say are perhaps
some of the biggest challenges that you yourself experienced
as a female weightlifter?
Um I, so um I think it's I have
been an athlete my whole life since I was
young and then in the middle of my life
when I was at my prime, as they say,
I had a back surgery and back injury. And
so for about 10 years from like 16 to,
well, actually it was about like 16 years, 16
to like 32. I didn't really do anything athletic
even though I was like state champion and really
fast and just did all kinds of sports as
a, as a child. Um, AND I had a,
I had a feminist father. So my father brought
me to the gym, um, as with my brother,
he encouraged me to lift weights, he encouraged me
to climb the rope, he encouraged me to do
pull ups. Um, AND he had been an athlete
and he never thought that I couldn't do that
kind of stuff even though I was a girl.
Um, AND so, you know, I have always sort
of felt like I've been in my body. And
so I kind of always had that perspective too,
that someone is important to me who is a
man. Like my father didn't think of me any
less as a female athlete. Um, BUT, you know,
I now weightlift, I had, I started when I
was 41 because it hasn't been a sport that
women have been able to participate in. Right. The
first women in the Olympics was 2000. And in
the United States weightlifting isn't like our best sport
isn't our dominant sport. And so it had to
be through crossfit that it became popular. So it
was only in like the 20 tens that it
even became something that was in gyms or something
that we would do. So part of it is
just like exposure to things and like, you know,
that I didn't as, as well as a biological
injury. Um And so thinking about like, so I
had entered into a sport when you're at as,
as an old lady and that was something that,
you know, but I'm, I'm one of the best
in my gym. I'm a world champion in my
age and weight class. I'm a national champion in
my age and weight class. I hold all of
the American records in my age and weight class,
even though I started only four years ago. And
so I'm be there's like elements about like, even
as an, I'm one of the oldest in my
gym and I lift the heaviest, one of the
heaviest. And I'm also one of the most meddled
as you would say. And I'm a woman and
I'm an old woman. And so that's like a
really interesting place to be um in terms of
like younger men come in, there's like young, you
know, man who I know who's 22 and he,
he is, you know, he like, still kind of
thinks about the gym and weightlifting is a very
masculine space, but our best lifters are all women
and I am sort of, they call me in
the gym, the matriarch. Um BECAUSE the coach has
kind of granted me this almost like a lioness,
lioness role where like, I'm the oldest, even though
I'm a woman, I'm in charge. And so I
can tell men to do things that they would
never hear from a woman. Um And so it's
like kind of this interesting space where my coach
is a feminist as well. And so it's like
in this sort, and I'm a professor. So I'm
used to kind of, you know, talking to 20
year olds, um and telling them what to do
or lecturing them. Um And so it's like this
and I study it. So not only do I
participate, but then I'm also doing, I have a,
you know, I did this whole research project on
it. And so it's really interesting to kind of
think about these younger generation of, of both men
and women who are coming into sports who are
just, you know, born in the two thousands, who
are, who are learning to respect women as maybe
their superiors in the gym who lift heavier than
them or who are like more metal than them.
Um, AND so I think that, that my experience
kind of coming into weightlifting late and being kind
of biologically good, even though I'm old and a
woman, um, I'm kind of built for this biologically
is, you know, kind of in a unfair, in
an unfair sort of way. Um, AND I think
that that's kind of, it really has sort of
troubled me and made me think about these kinds
of things and how I have been able to
do the sorts of things that I've been able
to do because of the people I'm with have
really have also been more inclusive, have taken a
more feminist perspective. Um And really encourage, like, my
coach has mostly women athletes, um, and that weightlifting
because of crossfit is now something I get to
do where I didn't get, I didn't even, it,
there was never even, never on my radar or
something. And if I had started doing it when
I like, started doing gymnastics at like five or
six, you know, how, you know, like what could
have happened, who knows? Those are, you know, that
we never know those kinds of things. But, um,
you know, we kind of thinking about like getting
our younger women and now because of our title
nine and more capacities and this Caitlin Clark phenomenon
and more inclusion and this idea that more girls
are participating and they're understanding themselves as they could
be athletes. Um And so there's this whole wide
opportunity and then at the same time because I
studied crossfit and fitness, right. There's still this really
narrow realm of like what a fit woman looks
like and she doesn't want to get bulky, she
wants to get toned and she's really trim and
she's on the elliptical, she's not lifting heavyweight, there's
some pushback against that, but really, that's sort of
still a lot of our media representation. And Ozempic
is kind of also added to that um to
that narrative. And so I think it's, it's, you
know, I'm constantly in conversation with it. Um Both
pushing boundaries as a weightlifter as well as like
and trying to break it down as a cultural
anthropologist that, you know, we're not as advanced as
we think we are because we still really police
men and women in sports um in very, very
narrow ways.
And uh what reactions do you tend to get
from people as a female weightlifter? I mean, particularly
from men, but people in general,
they will always want to compete with me. So
we'll be at the gym and I'll be lifting
if I go to a mainstream gym and not
my weightlifting gym and I'll be lifting squatting or
something heavy. Um And I can squat 100 and
30 kg. Um BUT I'll be squatting maybe 100
kg for reps and I will have men kind
of get next to me and they'll try to
compete. Um, AND they have injured themselves, like every
single man who I have, who has wanted to
compete with me, who isn't train, who doesn't train
in, like, that sport has injured themselves where they
just pulled a hamstring or hurt their back. And
so it's just like their understanding that just because
I'm a woman that they should be better than
me, makes them compete with me because they're like,
oh, she's lifting kind of heavy and then they
earth hurt themselves. So, I, there's a lot of
men hurting themselves and they just shouldn't hurt themselves
if they really would think about that. They're just
not going to necessarily be stronger than every woman
that they see. Um, SO it's, it's a lot
of like initial disrespect, um, and a lot of
bro behavior and then they might also kind of
think, 00, ok. Well, maybe not. Um, AND I
have seen more and more women lifting heavy and
I've seen more and more, I've been at regular
gyms where women will come up to me and
ask me for a spot even though they don't
know me. Um, BECAUSE there's so there is this
sort of female solidarity about, I see you, I
see you doing this thing that's usually a male
dominated thing and I'm gonna support you and I'm
gonna ask you for help and we're gonna support
each other in this process and there's very rarely
competition between those of us women who are doing
it. It's always the men who want to compete
with us. And I really, really like that too.
I really push back and I, and I encourage
it because then I like have to teach them
a lesson in my class professor role. It's always,
there's always a lesson to be learned.
So the book is again, gender empowering, strength, sports,
strong as feminist. There it is. So uh I'm
leaving the link to it in the description box
of the interview and Katie, uh apart from the
book, would you like to tell people where they
can find you and your work on the internet?
Yeah. Um In addition to this book, I have
another book coming out this year on Crossfit, specifically
called Red White and Crossfit. Um And that's NYU
Press that's coming out um this year. So keep
an eye out for it, but you can email
me at um Brooklyn College and easy to find
Katie Roseate Monic. I'm also on Instagram at Max's
N Pr S. Um And uh I also have
written a lot on the bar be um barbend.com
um for strength sport audiences. And um so I
have a number of articles on that website that
you can, that are geared, that are geared toward
a more general audience. So I welcome you to,
to read some of those.
Great. So I'm also leaving links to that in
the description of the interview and thank you again
so much for doing this. I really loved our
conversation.
Thank you, Ricardo. It was great. Um Thank you
for doing the work that you're doing. It's very
important. And um yeah, I we, we appreciate your
perspective and your dedication um to teaching all different
kinds of people about so many important topics. Thank
you.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights Learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
B no Wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in Nai
Zuk Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall,
Herz J and Lain Jung Y and the K
Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel Sran David Wilson
Yasa, dear Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte
Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt Pavlo Stass, Nale Me,
Gary G Alman, Samo, Zal Ari and YPJ Barboza
Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca,
Bela Gil Cortez Solis Scott Zachary, Ftw Daniel Friedman,
William Buckner Paul. Giorgino, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris
Williams and Peter Wo David Williams Di A Costa
Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Chao, Marie Martinez, Coralie
Chevalier, Bangalore Fist, Larry Dey Junior, Old Einon Starry
Michael Bailey. Then spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff
mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radis Mark Kemple Thomas Dvor
Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica,
no, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George
Katis Valentine Steinman, Perlis Kate Von Goler, Alexander Abert
Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner
Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks
to my producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca
Stina, Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon Bendik
Muller Thomas Trumble Catherine and Patrick Tobin John Carl
Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my
executive producers, Matthew lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Kan and
Rosie. Thank you for all.